---
title: 'How Full-Time Tutoring Changed my Life- Part 1: The Training Arc'
date: 2025-12-01
permalink: /posts/2023/12/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - tutoring
  - challenge
  - education
---
I spent my early 20s hustling, studying and wayfinding in life. I faced struggles with demands and responsibilities that came from different stakeholders. For me, this was a somewhat challenging period of time, and also one of the defining moments of my life as I got to better understand myself, and experience significant growth in certain aspects of life as I chose to step out of my comfort zone.

In this first post of a two-post series, I write about the “Training Arc” - about how a chance encounter led me to start on a full-time tutoring path.

Most Pre-University / University student wiIl, at some point in time, consider tutoring as a way to supplement their spendings as they go through an awkward stage of life - one where you’re old enough to have desires to spend your own money, but nowhere near capable enough to earn an amount to feel like your time is worth it. That was me, in the second half of 2021, as I approached the end of my National Service (NS). 

I had already decided on my post-ORD life: Work part-time for nine months until University started. Hopefully I’ll be able to find a meaningful job. If not, I’ll just do some administrative work (I had already gotten a part-time administrative role with TWG). During which, I may or may not do private tutoring.

But, tutoring? Having to travel to students’ homes, taking responsibility for their academic performance, handling the expectations of parents, being able to make small talk with students? That’s way out of the comfort zone of an introverted, shy 21 year-old boy who had not touched his study materials in almost two years. Probably not.

18 October 2021
======
I was in my bunk with my bunkmates, and we were having a conversation about what we would do after ORD. As I was getting dressed, a question came up “Do you want to teach JC Physics for a tuition centre? You can earn more than doing it privately, and training is provided. I asked D but he didn’t want it.”

My self-doubt was screaming inside my head, “Me? I can’t do public speaking. I don’t even have teaching experience.” 

But being the typical “poor” boy who was about to come out of National Service with little to no savings, I decided that I might give it a shot. The conversation ended as I left the bunk to return to my responsibilities, but the last thing he said was “I’ll update you.”

21 October 2021
======
I had shoved the conversation to the back of my head, thinking that the opportunity was probably passed on to someone more eligible. Then, a Telegram message came in

The prospect of tutoring professionally was more real than ever. I was having wet feet at this point, regretting ever having brought up my idea of tutoring in that conversation. R had “referred” me, and how I respond from here on may reflect poorly on him. What if I met M, and wasn’t deemed good enough? What if I didn’t meet M? How would all these turn out?

I thought for a long while about what to reply, and decided “ it’s just a conversation to find out more. Let’s do it professionally - no commitments yet anyway.”

I agreed to having a chat, and arranged to meet M at the tuition centre before the next time I booked in.

28 October 2021 - The "Conversation"
======
The day came. I came out from Beauty World MRT, trying to configure my Google Maps to lead me to the centre. 

I was dressed in T-Shirt and Sweatpants, not the appropriate outfit for an interview of some sort. After all, I was going to return to camp right after the chat.

As I walked up the hill towards the centre, I was perspiring and my heart rate was rising. Was it the hill, the humidity of this country, or was I just completely nervous about this?

Noise filled my head - “Am I dressed too shabily? What would they think of me? How would this conversation turn out? What if I get rejected? Isn’t it just a conversation? Maybe this is a mistake.”

After what felt like an eternity, I finally reached the tuition centre, not knowing exactly what to expect.

I pushed open the door. A bell hanging on the door handle jingled, signalling my entrance.

This was where I first met the then 25-year-old M who had texted me, and was running Magic Square. M was a tall guy with a stern, serious demeanour, pretty stern-looking for someone you met for the first time. He came out to greet me, we shook hands, and we got to discussion.

He gave me an opportunity to start laying out the questions I had first. But I really only had one question that day - “How does all of this work? I have zero experience, how am I going to teach?”

He shared with me the details of how lessons function, and how I would be trained to be able to teach. 

Harsh expectations were then laid out on the table. It was made explicitly clear that despite being a full-time student when University started, my priority would have to be the company. Albeit - teaching well, and being able to bring in more students for the center. Understandable - it was a business after all. Most importantly, I was going to be treated as a full-time employee and adult - which meant serious responsibility and accountability. A contract lasts for a year - so it would be in my best interest to commit at least a year, which meant handling my first semester at University together with  a full-time job.

Then I met K, who was teaching JC Physics at that point in time. He had a shorter frame, with a much friendlier demeanour. Before I left the centre, he told me “Don’t worry, I used to take mechanical engineering at NTU. If you join us, I’ll be happy to share my experiences with you.”

That concluded the meeting that day. Truth be told, M was a really convincing person. He basically took my doubts about myself, and convinced me that I was in good hands. II left the centre with a slight inclination to take on the offer. One of the appeals was the potential salary (it was sort of commission-based), but I was both drawn to and conflicted by the provision of training.

On one hand, I really liked the idea of being guided on learning how to teach, present and sell. Yet, someone was willing to take a chance on me - this was a huge responsibility for me to bear, I did not want to let anyone down. 

“What if I just can’t teach well? What if I’m not good with presentations? What if I’m not good enough to handle my studies and teach? And I still have to grow my student count?”

Right after, I returned to Yew Tee MRT and started to make my way back to Kranji Camp III as I booked in for the week. This was a pretty big decision to be made, but I’m 21 and I shouldn’t really be asking my parents for their opinion - they’d definitely prefer me to study. So I decided to ask only one person - my girlfriend. And she was really worried about me making poor decisions. 

Somehow, deep down inside me, this conversation just reaffirmed my decision to go ahead with this opportunity. Since young, I have always been concerned about grades and nothing more. And my girlfriend knows that, and she did not believe that I would be able to put something else above my grades, and that I would stress myself out because I wouldn’t want to let others down either. The worst possible outcome? I could break down and not achieve anything substantial in both tutoring and my own education. 

But the 21-year-old me did not care. All I thought was “I have eight months to figure this shit out before school starts. I could make use of some extra cash, maybe I can pay off my school fees without relying on my parents after all.” I only confirmed my decision to proceed with M a week later, but deep down in my heart, I already had my answer.

After I gave my final decision to M, there was no hesitation in proceeding with the next steps - training.

5th November 2021 - The First Training
======
I showed up to my first training, having prepared to learn how to teach superposition when M threw me a curveball.

“Can you show us what you have prepared? Just teach a little bit and we’ll correct you from there.”

I had not done this before, I had absolutely no idea what I was supposed to do. As I stood in front of the classroom, I’m not sure if M and K noticed it but my arms were trembling slightly. I turned to face the board and started writing words on the board. That was my first time writing on a whiteboard, and I had no idea how to write neatly and large enough on a whiteboard (it was surprisingly, really different from writing on paper). As  I was writing, I could feel my heart beating faster, and I was trying to subtly take deep breaths to calm myself down. After a minute of scribbling on the board, I turned to face M and K, and I started to murmur the content of the chapter in a monotonous voice. 

After what felt like an eternity, M cut me off. All I could think of was “Thank God”. 

He then went through the countless elements of what would constitute a good presentation and a good way to teach (i.e. body language, intonation, voice projection etc). K went through the specifics of the content and how he would cover it. I was encouraged to incorporate the elements M shared, but to incorporate my own style of explaining the content.

The simplest of the elements was to “Speak Loudly” - which I completely struggled with. It felt as if my voice was stuck in my throat. After having me make multiple attempts that day, we wrapped up training for the day. 

Constant Practice - Over and Over again
I went home feeling absolutely dejected. I could not even project my voice, how was I going to incorporate everything else? I had to do something about it.

I turned to one handy tool in learning a new skill - YouTube, to find tips and tricks to projecting my voice. 

I spent my free time practising how to recite my lesson loudly. Being afraid of my family members judging me, I would wait for my brother to leave the house before I did it in a locked room (I share a room with my brother). Or else, I would go to my girlfriend’s house and practice in the toilet of her bedroom, with both the toilet door and room door closed, with my girlfriend doing her work in the living room. (Extreme, I know - that’s how shy I was about this). 

Until today, I am still eternally grateful for my loved ones being understanding of the time when I seemed to lock myself away without much reason or explanation LOL

Weekly Trainings After Work
======
I had training once a week, where I would teach M and K a concept of my choice. As weeks went by, I still felt like I wasn’t doing well enough. I still felt soft and unengaging. The centre was located at Beauty World, and I stayed at Ubi. Whenever I took the train to attend training sessions, I would literally have a heavy feeling in my heart, and the 1-hour train ride from Ubi to Beauty World would feel like forever. At some point, I absolutely hated showing up for training sessions as it felt like a reflection of my failed attempts to get better. (This was where I learnt that improvements can be really hard to notice if you aren’t tracking them - I was probably making improvements, but I just couldn’t see it.)

And just as I thought the feeling couldn’t get any worse, I was tasked to sit in K's classes to chat with and get to know his students, as I was supposed to eventually take over his classes. 

The Next Part of the Job: Interacting with Fresh Faces
======
18 October was the day of the very first lesson I sat in. It was absolutely nerve wracking as I had to make small talk during breaks - something I am not great at. Thankfully, she was friendly enough to entertain me, and while I can't really remember the contents of our conversation - I do remember having walked away from that feeling like it wasn’t as bad as I thought. 

After having sat in for multiple classes, I got pretty acquainted with the same few faces, and eventually got comfortable enough to take over K’s classes, but that wasn’t until I had conducted a trial with my very first student.

Taking on my First Student
======
After weeks of training and sitting in for lessons, I was asked to trial a girl who was planning to change tuition centres. 

It was stressful, it was my first attempt at actually teaching a lesson, and with stakes involved - “Would I be able to convert my very first trial? Am I even ready? I’m pitting myself against better established tutors.” Nonetheless, it had to be done, there was no backing out of this anyway.

I showed up to the centre 30 minutes early. The centre was empty as it was an odd-time of the day. I started to print my worksheet, and mentally prepared myself for the lesson, telling myself that this was just “experiential training” and I should take it easy. As I was lost in thought, the bell on the front door jingled.

My first trial student walked into the centre. I greeted her, exchanged a few words, and ushered her to the classroom, and my very first official lesson had begun.

This was an unusual student - she asked really weird but interesting questions - the kind that did not fall within the syllabus, but was a product of curiosity and desire to understand. I found myself stumped, I knew the answers to her question, but I could not put it into simple words for her to understand - this was, after all, my first time encountering questions, and ones that I did not expect. I tried my best, and she seemed to get it, and that concluded my first lesson. 

I followed up with her after the lesson to check on whether she would like to join my lessons. This was my first time texting a “lead” in the interest of “conversion”. As I sent the message, I immediately put my phone away, not prepared to see what reply I would get. 

Three hours later, I checked my phone. To my pleasant surprise, I got a positive response.
 
In the coming weeks, I slowly took over K’s classes one by one. With each class that I took over, I constantly sought feedback from them via K, and continued to refine my teaching content and form. 

Conclusion
======
That concluded my “Training Arc”, and marked my transition into a full-time Physics Tutor. This story (of how a shy, possibly socially-anxious Cheng Ren learnt to tutor) was never shared with anyone. Baring my inner thoughts and emotions have always been scary, and I’ve never seen the value of compiling this story from my reflections. After all, not many could relate to overwhelming emotions I had from a deceptively simple task of teaching. However, as I approached the end of my tutoring stint in November 2023, I looked back at these moments fondly, appreciating the butterfly effect - how a random in-bunk conversation led to so many experiences unique to me. I also reflect on these moments where I pushed through despite struggling, and overcame the desire to just drop everything and return to what I had originally planned for myself. 

I used to firmly believe that “hard work beats talent” is a somewhat toxic mentality, for it encourages people to beat themselves over not working hard enough to overcome some unbridgeable gaps in talent. I used to blame conditions outside my locus of control for my failures and gave up easily. But this journey taught me one thing - hard work may not beat talent all the time, but it does not matter. We all just have to have it in us to show up and try when it matters. Every failed attempt means we’re one attempt closer at succeeding. It doesn’t really matter how many attempts I take, as long as I eventually accomplish what I set out to do. 
